# Analysis pipeline for Melanoma IL2 study

This pipeline takes as input text files and images generated by Halo in addition to an extensive set of analysis configuration files to compare sample groups. Each comparison involves extensive metrics, statistics and visualizations.

## Curate input data

Input includes paths to data output directly from Halo (CSV, images, XML boundaries) and manually curated study meta data.

#### Meta data files to be created are:

    - [StudyName]_Patients.xlsx
    - [StudyName]_Samples.xlsx
    - [StudyName]_FOVs.xlsx
    - [StudyName]_CellTypes.xlsx
    - [StudyName]_Markers.xlsx
    - [StudyName]_Files.xlsx

See [study_meta_data.md](docs/study_meta_data.md) for instructions on how to create each of these files.

## Configuration

Run script to create project directory structure and generate YAML file of configuration to be used throughout the pipeline.

Create project directory and run configuration
```
mkdir [project_dir]
cd [project_dir]
Rscript [src_dir]/scripts/configure_study.R \
    --source_halo_csv_dir             /path/to/halo/csv/files \
    --source_halo_image_dir           /path/to/halo/image/files \
    --source_halo_boundaries_xml_dir  /path/to/halo/boundary/xml/files \
    --source_meta_dir                 /path/to/meta/data
```
Optionally, you may pass an existing YAML file containing pre-set configuration, additional config files (see usage), and/or statistics XLSX files with comparisons and conditions to be analyzed.

<b>NOTE: these additional config and XLSX files will have to be before the pipeline is run.</b>


In addition to creating the directory structure for your study, the configuration will link all source files to the newly created project directory and set the configuration to point to the local directories. Study configuration will be validated and written to:

    **input/config/study_config.yaml**

**NOTE: One of the most important checks done during configuration is the list of samples to be analyzed. PLEASE review warnings carefully, fix errors and check the 'SAMPLES' parameter in this config file before proceeding!!**

## Notes on R

Currently using local R installation:

    /home/byrne/R/R-3.6.1

Check docs for dependencies

## Input data validation

It is a good idea to check all manually-created meta files for errors. This is not required as it is the first step of the pipeline anyway, but doing so first can help save you a log of debugging headaches later on. You may either pass to the script the entire configuration or just the directory of meta data files.

```
Rscript [src_dir]/scripts/validate_input.R --manifest input/config/study_config.yaml
```
or if configuration is not yet set up/validated:
```
Rscript [src_dir]/scripts/validate_input.R \
    --meta_dir /path/to/meta/files \
    --statistics_questions_file  /path/to/stats/questions/xlsx/file
```

## Run pipeline

A convenience shell script was created to easily launch pipeline on a LSF cluster.
```
sh [src_dir]/pipeline/run.sh
```
